Add ERC: Token Puller (#1587)
ethereum/ERCs: ERCS/erc-8187.md

- Renunciation of allowances

This enables use cases such as recurring payments, subscriptions, automated settlements, guardian-managed limits, and credit-card-like spending controls in DeFi and payment applications, while improving security and yield optimization.

## Motivation

Current token approval standards ([ERC-20](./eip-20.md) `approve`/`transferFrom`, [ERC-2612](./eip-2612.md) permits) require owners to hold liquid balances and often involve multiple transactions or direct balance pulls. This creates friction and risks:

- Owners forgo yield from invested positions (vaults or other DeFi protocols)
- Atomization of funds in multiple accounts linked to different spending mechanisms (like crypto credit cards/neo banks)
- Large liquid balances in hot wallets increase security risks
- Recurring or delegated payments require frequent owner interaction
- No standardized way for one spender to delegate portions of their allowance (e.g., budget enforcers or guardians)

The Token Puller Interface addresses these by introducing an intermediary Puller contract that:

- Manages approvals and limits
- Executes custom sourcing logic during pulls

> - Supports signature-based approvals compatible with EOAs, smart accounts, and pre-deploy contracts

Reviewer: "EOA" should be expanded on first use:
```suggestion
- Supports signature-based approvals compatible with externally owned accounts (EOAs), smart accounts, and pre-deploy contracts
```

- Allows spenders to transfer/renounce portions of their allowances

The core motivation behind this ERC is to cleanly decouple spending logic from asset management strategies. By introducing a Puller contract (or, in the smart-account case, the account itself), the act of sourcing tokens — whether from a lending position, a vault, a swap, or simply an internal balance — becomes an implementation detail hidden from the spender. The spender only requests a pull for a certain amount and token; it never needs to know or interact with how those tokens are actually obtained. This atomic sourcing + transfer pattern reduces complexity on the payment or spending side while letting users keep their funds invested until the moment they are needed.

## Specification

> The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Reviewer: The keyword list is missing "NOT RECOMMENDED", and RFC references must link to rfc-editor.org (including RFC 8174 for the all-capitals qualification):
```suggestion
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119) and [RFC 8174](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174).
```

- **Permit** — An off-chain EIP-712 signed message (following the `PullPermit` struct) that authorizes setting or updating a pull allowance without requiring an on-chain `approvePull` transaction from the owner.

### Methods

#### `approvePull`

```solidity
function approvePull(address token, address spender, uint256 limit) external
```

Sets or updates the pull allowance of `spender` for `token` from `msg.sender` (the owner).

- MUST revert if called by any address other than the owner.
- Setting `limit` to 0 revokes the spender's permission to pull that token.
- MUST overwrite any previous allowance for `(token, owner, spender)` with the new `limit`.
- MUST emit the `PullApproval` event.

#### `pullFrom`

```solidity
function pullFrom(address token, address owner, address to, uint256 amount) external
```

Pulls `amount` of `token` from `owner` and transfers it to `to`, after executing the Puller's implementation-specific sourcing logic.

- MUST revert unless `msg.sender` has sufficient allowance: `pullAllowance(token, owner, msg.sender) >= amount`.

> - When `msg.sender == owner`, it MAY not revert and ignore allowance. In that case, the puller just abstracts away sourcing logic.

Reviewer: "MAY not revert and ignore allowance" is ambiguous — "MAY not" is not an RFC 2119 construct (it reads as either permission or prohibition):
```suggestion
- When `msg.sender == owner`, the Puller MAY ignore the allowance check. In that case, the Puller just abstracts away the sourcing logic.
```

- If the current allowance is not `type(uint256).max`, MUST decrease the allowance by `amount`.

> - MAY not to decrease the allowance when it is `type(uint256).max` (infinite approval).

Reviewer: Same "MAY not" issue, plus broken grammar ("MAY not to decrease"):
```suggestion
- MAY skip decreasing the allowance when it is `type(uint256).max` (infinite approval).
```

#### `maxPullable`

```solidity
function maxPullable(address token, address owner, uint256 upTo) external view returns (uint256)
```

Returns the max amount that can be pulled of a given `token` from a given `owner`. The `upTo` parameter allows early
termination if that amount is reached.

- The returned value MUST be between 0 and `upTo`.
- Maximum amount that can be pulled from a given `owner` by a given `spender` can be computed with `maxPullable(token, owner, pullAllowance(token, owner, spender))`.

#### `permitPull`

```solidity
function permitPull(
    address token,
    address owner,
    address spender,
    uint256 limit,
    uint256 deadline,
    bytes calldata signature
) external
```

Approves or updates a pull allowance using an off-chain EIP-712 signature.

- The signature MUST be over the `PullPermit` struct:
    - `token`, `owner`, `spender`, `limit`, `nonce = nonces(owner)`, `deadline`
- `PullPermit` typehash:
    ```solidity
    keccak256("PullPermit(address token,address owner,address spender,uint256 limit,uint256 nonce,uint256 deadline)")
    ```
- Digest computation:
    ```solidity
    keccak256(abi.encodePacked(
        "\x19\x01",

>         eip712Domain(),

Reviewer: `eip712Domain()` is the ERC-5267 metadata getter — it returns the domain fields as a tuple, not a 32-byte value, so this digest computation doesn't type-check as written. Did you mean the EIP-712 domain separator (the `keccak256` of the encoded domain, e.g. `DOMAIN_SEPARATOR()` as in ERC-2612)?

Author: Fixed, I updated it following the same structure as ERC-2612.

        keccak256(abi.encode(TYPEHASH, token, owner, spender, limit, nonces(owner), deadline))
    ))
    ```
- SHOULD validate the signature following [ERC-6492](./eip-6492.md) rules (EOA via `ecrecover`, [ERC-1271](./eip-1271.md) contracts, pre-deploy via magic suffix).
- MUST revert if `block.timestamp > deadline`, signature is invalid, or nonce does not match.
- On success:
    - MUST increment `nonces(owner)`
    - MUST set `pullAllowance(token, owner, spender)` to `limit` (overwriting previous value)
    - MUST emit `PullApproval(token, owner, spender, limit)`
- MAY be called by anyone (e.g., spender, relayer).

#### `pullFromWithPermit`

```solidity
function pullFromWithPermit(
    address token,
    address owner,
    address to,
    uint256 amount,
    uint256 deadline,
    bytes calldata signature
) external
```

Atomically applies a permit (with `limit == amount`) and executes a pull in a single transaction.

- The signature MUST correspond to a `PullPermit` where `limit == amount` and `spender == msg.sender`.
- SHOULD call `permitPull(token, owner, msg.sender, amount, deadline, signature)`, but it SHOULDN'T revert if

>   this call fails, to avoid front-run DOS attack.

Reviewer: "SHOULDN'T" is not an RFC 2119 keyword: spell out "SHOULD NOT". Also, the accepted casing is "DoS", not "DOS":
```suggestion
- SHOULD call `permitPull(token, owner, msg.sender, amount, deadline, signature)`, but it SHOULD NOT revert if
  this call fails, to avoid a front-run DoS attack.
```

    // Allowance delegation
    function transferPullAllowance(address token, address owner, address toSpender, uint256 amount) external;

    function permitPull(
        address token,
        address owner,
        address spender,
        uint256 limit,
        uint256 deadline,
        bytes calldata signature
    ) external;

    function pullFromWithPermit(
        address token,
        address owner,
        address to,
        uint256 amount,
        uint256 deadline,
        bytes calldata signature
    ) external;
}
```

## Rationale

Gasless approvals via signed permits and the ability to transfer allowances between spenders were added specifically to support credit-card-like experiences and delegated spending flows. For example, a user might grant a large or infinite allowance to a trusted "guardian" service that enforces daily/monthly limits and automatically refills sub-allowances for individual spenders (e.g., a payment app or merchant processor). These features make recurring or delegated payments more practical without requiring the owner to sign every transaction or maintain liquid balances.

> The interface deliberately mirrors familiar ERC-20 patterns (approve / allowance / transferFrom) and builds on established extensions like ERC-2612 (Permit) to minimize the learning curve and avoid unnecessary naming collisions. Where possible, function names, event structures, and parameter ordering stay close to precedents so developers and tools can adopt the standard quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interface deliberately mirrors familiar ERC-20 patterns (`approve` / `allowance` / `transferFrom`) and builds on established extensions like ERC-2612 (Permit) to minimize the learning curve and avoid unnecessary naming collisions. Where possible, function names, event structures, and parameter ordering stay close to precedents so developers and tools can adopt the standard quickly.
```

> The `maxPullable` function provides a standardized way to query available pull capacity (similar to balanceOf for direct holdings or maxWithdraw in [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md)), independent of spender allowances. The upTo parameter allows efficient checks in cascaded sourcing implementations without forcing full strategy evaluation every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `maxPullable` function provides a standardized way to query available pull capacity (similar to `balanceOf` for direct holdings or maxWithdraw in [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md)), independent of spender allowances. The `upTo` parameter allows efficient checks in cascaded sourcing implementations without forcing full strategy evaluation every time.
```

> Finally, the design is intentionally compatible with both EOAs and smart accounts, while leaning into the current direction of account abstraction ([ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) and others). A particularly powerful pattern is for a smart account to implement the IPuller interface directly on itself. In that case owner == address(this), the account already controls its own funds (and any pre-approved external positions), and there is no need to grant approvals or trust an external Puller contract. This reduces deployment overhead, eliminates an extra approval step, and allows the pull logic to participate in batched user operations — a natural fit for modular wallets that already expose custom execution and spending-limit interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the design is intentionally compatible with both EOAs and smart accounts, while leaning into the current direction of account abstraction ([ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) and others). A particularly powerful pattern is for a smart account to implement the `IPuller` interface directly on itself. In that case `owner == address(this)`, the account already controls its own funds (and any pre-approved external positions), and there is no need to grant approvals or trust an external Puller contract. This reduces deployment overhead, eliminates an extra approval step, and allows the pull logic to participate in batched user operations — a natural fit for modular wallets that already expose custom execution and spending-limit interfaces.
```

## Reference Implementation

> A reference implementation is available at `https://github.com/gnarvaja/token-puller-ref`.

Reviewer: Links to arbitrary GitHub repositories are not permitted (EIP-1, "Linking to External Resources"), and wrapping the URL in backticks doesn't exempt it. Please move the reference implementation into `assets/erc-8187/` and reference it relatively (`../assets/erc-8187/...`), or keep the section as a `<!-- TODO -->` comment as suggested earlier until it can be included.

Author: Fixed, I added the reference implementation in the assets folder. I haven't included the tests or the Hardhat tooling, following the practices I saw in other ERCs.

## Security Considerations

- External calls during sourcing (e.g. withdrawals, redemptions, swaps) can open reentrancy vectors. Implementations must follow checks-effects-interactions and protect against recursive calls.

> - Allowance transfer enables refill patterns (guardian refilling sub-allowances), but a compromised spender can redirect its allowance to arbitrary addresses. The same trade-offs between infinite and finite allowances that apply to ERC-20 also apply here: infinite approvals improve UX but increase damage potential if the spender is compromised.

Reviewer: "UX" should be expanded:
```suggestion
- Allowance transfer enables refill patterns (guardian refilling sub-allowances), but a compromised spender can redirect its allowance to arbitrary addresses. The same trade-offs between infinite and finite allowances that apply to ERC-20 also apply here: infinite approvals improve user experience but increase damage potential if the spender is compromised.
```

- Custom sourcing logic can depend on external protocols that are subject to oracle manipulation, failed withdrawals, slippage, or protocol-specific exploits. Implementations should apply appropriate output guards where the logic allows it.

- Permit signatures depend on correct validation of EIP-712 digests, nonces, deadlines, and ERC-6492 rules (EOA recovery, ERC-1271 contracts, pre-deploy detection). Errors in any of these steps can lead to unauthorized approvals.

- Fee-on-transfer and rebasing tokens may behave unexpectedly during sourcing and transfer. Implementations should test with such tokens and consider before/after balance checks when necessary.

> - When the Puller interface is implemented directly on a smart account (owner == address(this)), any bug in the Puller code affects the entire account. Modular designs that isolate the logic are preferable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the Puller interface is implemented directly on a smart account (`owner == address(this)`), any bug in the Puller code affects the entire account. Modular designs that isolate the logic are preferable.
```

Also check if "Puller" should get backticks.

The interface supports:

-   On-chain approvals with limits
-   Off-chain [EIP-712](./eip-712.md) signed permits (with [ERC-6492](./eip-6492.md) universal signature validation)
-   Allowance delegation/transfer between spenders
-   Infinite approval handling
-   Renunciation of allowances
-   Atomic permit + pull operations

This enables use cases such as recurring payments, subscriptions, automated settlements, guardian-managed limits, and credit-card-like spending controls in DeFi and payment applications, while improving security and yield optimization.

## Motivation

Current token approval standards ([ERC-20](./eip-20.md) `approve`/`transferFrom`, [ERC-2612](./eip-2612.md) permits) require owners to hold liquid balances and often involve multiple transactions or direct balance pulls. This creates friction and risks:

-   Owners forgo yield from invested positions (Aave, Compound, etc.)

> -   Atomization of funds in multiple accounts linked to different spending mechanisms (like crypto credit cards/neo banks)

Reviewer 2: We prefer to avoid mentioning specific products. It gives an unfair advantage to those that exist before the proposal goes to final.

Author: Fixed, I removed all mentions to specific products and replaced them with generic categories like "lending protocols".

Additional terms that appear frequently and benefit from clear definition:

-   **Pull Allowance** (or simply **Allowance**) — The maximum cumulative amount of a specific token that a given spender is permitted to pull from a given owner via the Puller, as tracked by `pullAllowance(token, owner, spender)`. This value can be finite or infinite (`type(uint256).max`).

-   **Sourcing Logic** — The implementation-specific mechanism executed by the Puller during a successful `pullFrom` or `pullFromWithPermit` call to make tokens available for transfer. Examples include calling `withdraw` on Aave/Compound, redeeming vault shares, unwrapping tokens, or performing swaps. The exact logic is outside the scope of this ERC and is defined by each Puller implementation.

-   **Permit** — An off-chain EIP-712 signed message (following the `PullPermit` struct) that authorizes setting or updating a pull allowance without requiring an on-chain `approvePull` transaction from the owner.

### Methods

> #### approvePull

Reviewer 2: Put code (even in headers) in backticks (\`).

Author: Fixed, both in Methods and Events.

    bytes calldata signature
) external
```

Approves or updates a pull allowance using an off-chain EIP-712 signature.

-   The signature MUST be over the `PullPermit` struct:
    -   `token`, `owner`, `spender`, `limit`, `nonce = nonces(owner)`, `deadline`
-   `PullPermit` typehash:
    ```solidity
    keccak256("PullPermit(address token,address owner,address spender,uint256 limit,uint256 nonce,uint256 deadline)")
    ```
-   Digest computation:
    ```solidity
    keccak256(abi.encodePacked(
        "\x19\x01",
        eip712Domain(),
        keccak256(abi.encode(TYPEHASH, token, owner, spender, limit, nonces(owner), deadline))
    ))
    ```
-   SHOULD validate the signature following [ERC-6492](./eip-6492.md) rules (EOA via `ecrecover`, [ERC-1271](./eip-1271.md) contracts, pre-deploy via magic suffix).
-   MUST revert if `block.timestamp > deadline`, signature is invalid, or nonce does not match.
-   On success:
    -   MUST increment `nonces(owner)`
    -   MUST set `pullAllowance(token, owner, spender)` to `limit` (overwriting previous value)
    -   MUST emit `PullApproval(token, owner, spender, limit)`
-   MAY be called by anyone (e.g., spender, relayer).

> #### pullFromWithPermit

Reviewer 2: Looks like there's something weird with the formatting here.

Author: I applied a markdown linter to all the file, should be fine now.

    function permitPull(
        address token,
        address owner,
        address spender,
        uint256 limit,
        uint256 deadline,
        bytes calldata signature
    ) external;

    function pullFromWithPermit(
        address token,
        address owner,
        address to,
        uint256 amount,
        uint256 deadline,
        bytes calldata signature
    ) external;
}
```

## Rationale

The core motivation behind this ERC is to cleanly separate spending logic from asset management strategies. By introducing a Puller contract (or, in the smart-account case, the account itself), the act of sourcing tokens — whether from a lending position, a vault, a swap, or simply an internal balance — becomes an implementation detail hidden from the spender. The spender only requests a pull for a certain amount and token; it never needs to know or interact with how those tokens are actually obtained. This atomic sourcing + transfer pattern reduces complexity on the payment or spending side while letting users keep their funds invested until the moment they are needed.

> Gasless approvals via signed permits and the ability to transfer allowances between spenders were added specifically to support credit-card-like experiences and delegated spending flows. For example, a user might grant a large or infinite allowance to a trusted "guardian" service that enforces daily/monthly limits and automatically refills sub-allowances for individual spenders (e.g., a payment app or merchant processor). These features make recurring or delegated payments more practical without requiring the owner to sign every transaction or maintain liquid balances.

Reviewer 2: This seems to be explaining why the proposal as a whole needs to exist, and that kind of content belongs in Motivation. The Rationale should be used for explaining content within the proposal itself. My favourite analogy is:

> Motivation: Ethereum needs to build a new shed because...
> Rationale: We choose to use steel walls for the shed because...

Author: Fixed, I moved the "The core motivation..." paragraph to the motivation section. The other one, "Gasless approvals" belongs to the rationale section, IMO.

The `maxPullable` function provides a standardized way to query available pull capacity (similar to balanceOf for direct holdings or maxWithdraw in [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md)), independent of spender allowances. The upTo parameter allows efficient checks in cascaded sourcing implementations without forcing full strategy evaluation every time.

Finally, the design is intentionally compatible with both EOAs and smart accounts, while leaning into the current direction of account abstraction ([ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) and others). A particularly powerful pattern is for a smart account to implement the IPuller interface directly on itself. In that case owner == address(this), the account already controls its own funds (and any pre-approved external positions), and there is no need to grant approvals or trust an external Puller contract. This reduces deployment overhead, eliminates an extra approval step, and allows the pull logic to participate in batched user operations — a natural fit for modular wallets that already expose custom execution and spending-limit interfaces.

## Reference Implementation

Coming soon...

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: reference implementation -->
```

Author: Thanks for your review! 

I actually built the reference implementation, https://github.com/gnarvaja/erc-8187-ref , I added it. 

I will review and fix the rest of your comments as soon as possible.

Author: Finally, I changed the URL of the repository, https://github.com/gnarvaja/token-puller-ref, and used backticks.

- On success:
    - MUST increment `nonces(owner)`
    - MUST set `pullAllowance(token, owner, spender)` to `limit` (overwriting previous value)
    - MUST emit `PullApproval(token, owner, spender, limit)`
- MAY be called by anyone (e.g., spender, relayer).

#### `pullFromWithPermit`

```solidity
function pullFromWithPermit(
    address token,
    address owner,
    address to,
    uint256 amount,
    uint256 deadline,
    bytes calldata signature
) external
```

Atomically applies a permit (with `limit == amount`) and executes a pull in a single transaction.

- The signature MUST correspond to a `PullPermit` where `limit == amount` and `spender == msg.sender`.
- SHOULD call `permitPull(token, owner, msg.sender, amount, deadline, signature)`, but it SHOULD NOT revert if
  this call fails, to avoid a front-run DoS attack.
- On successful permit:
    - MUST set allowance to `amount`
    - MUST immediately call the equivalent of `pullFrom(token, owner, to, amount)`
- If the permit was successfully applied, MUST emit `PullApproval` followed by `TokensPulled`; otherwise MUST emit only `TokensPulled`

> - MUST emit `PullApproval` followed by `TokensPulled`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Hi @gnarvaja, sorry for the wait. I believe this bullet point is now listed twice (delete the second one, per suggestion of this comment)

---
eip: 8187
title: Token Puller
description: Interface for permissioned, on-demand token pulls with custom sourcing logic, permit support, and allowance delegation
author: Guillermo Narvaja (@gnarvaja)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/erc-8187-token-puller-interface/27896
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2026-02-27

> requires: 20, 712, 2612, 5267, 6492

Reviewer: Maybe add ERC-1271 to requirements?

- If the current allowance is not `type(uint256).max`, MUST decrease the allowance by `amount`.
- MAY skip decreasing the allowance when it is `type(uint256).max` (infinite approval).
- SHOULD execute the Puller's custom sourcing logic to obtain the tokens (implementation-defined).
- MUST transfer exactly `amount` of `token` to `to`.
- MUST revert if sourcing fails, allowance is insufficient, caller is unauthorized, or the transfer reverts.
- MUST emit the `TokensPulled` event on success.

#### `transferPullAllowance`

```solidity
function transferPullAllowance(address token, address owner, address toSpender, uint256 amount) external
```

Transfers `amount` of pull allowance from `msg.sender` (the current spender) to `toSpender` for the `(token, owner)` pair.

- MUST revert unless `pullAllowance(token, owner, msg.sender) >= amount`.
- Special case — infinite allowance transfer:
    - If `amount == type(uint256).max` **and** current allowance == `type(uint256).max`:
        - MUST set `msg.sender`'s allowance to 0
        - MUST set `toSpender`'s allowance to `type(uint256).max`
- Otherwise:
    - MUST decrease `msg.sender`'s allowance by `amount` (unless infinite)

>     - MUST increase `toSpender`'s allowance by `amount` (unless `toSpender == address(0)`)

Reviewer: Two edge cases worth covering here:

1. The reference implementation (`BasePuller.sol`) skips the increase when `toSpender`'s allowance is already `type(uint256).max`, which deviates from this MUST as written.
2. The spec is silent on overflow when `toAllowance + amount` exceeds `type(uint256).max` (the reference implementation reverts via checked arithmetic).

Consider making both explicit, e.g. "MUST increase `toSpender`'s allowance by `amount`, unless `toSpender == address(0)` or `toSpender`'s allowance is `type(uint256).max`; MUST revert if the increase would overflow."

Author: 1. Fixed the reference implementation, just increases the toSpender's allowance and reverts on overflow. 
2. IMO, there's no need to specify the overflow error. An implementation can decide to set the allowance to type(uint256).max instead of overflowing, and it would be fine (less gas-efficient probably).

Better to leave that open to implementors, if they prioritize gas efficiency or fault-proof.

- SHOULD allow `toSpender == address(0)` as a mechanism to renounce allowance (decrease only, no increase).
- MUST revert if `toSpender == msg.sender` (self-transfer is a no-op and should be prevented).
- MUST emit the `TransferPullAllowance` event on success.

#### `pullAllowance`

```solidity
function pullAllowance(address token, address owner, address spender) external view returns (uint256)
```

Returns the units of `token` that `spender` is allowed to pull from `owner`.

#### `maxPullable`

```solidity
function maxPullable(address token, address owner, uint256 upTo) external view returns (uint256)
```

Returns the max amount that can be pulled of a given `token` from a given `owner`. The `upTo` parameter allows early
termination if that amount is reached.

- The returned value MUST be between 0 and `upTo`.

> - Maximum amount that can be pulled from a given `owner` by a given `spender` can be computed with `maxPullable(token, owner, pullAllowance(token, owner, spender))`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The maximum amount that can be pulled from a given `owner` by a given `spender` can be computed with `maxPullable(token, owner, pullAllowance(token, owner, spender))`.
```

- MUST revert if `block.timestamp > deadline`, signature is invalid, or nonce does not match.
- On success:
    - MUST increment `nonces(owner)`
    - MUST set `pullAllowance(token, owner, spender)` to `limit` (overwriting previous value)
    - MUST emit `PullApproval(token, owner, spender, limit)`
- MAY be called by anyone (e.g., spender, relayer).

#### `pullFromWithPermit`

```solidity
function pullFromWithPermit(
    address token,
    address owner,
    address to,
    uint256 amount,
    uint256 deadline,
    bytes calldata signature
) external
```

Atomically applies a permit (with `limit == amount`) and executes a pull in a single transaction.

- The signature MUST correspond to a `PullPermit` where `limit == amount` and `spender == msg.sender`.
- SHOULD call `permitPull(token, owner, msg.sender, amount, deadline, signature)`, but it SHOULD NOT revert if
  this call fails, to avoid a front-run DoS attack.
- On successful permit:
    - MUST set allowance to `amount`
    - MUST immediately call the equivalent of `pullFrom(token, owner, to, amount)`
- MUST revert only if the pull fails.

> - MUST emit `PullApproval` followed by `TokensPulled`.

Reviewer: These MUSTs contradict the fallback path sanctioned above: when the permit fails (e.g. front-run) but the existing allowance already covers the pull, no `PullApproval` is emitted, yet this bullet unconditionally requires it. Similarly, "MUST revert only if the pull fails" conflicts with the requirement below that the call reverts when `msg.sender` is not the permit's spender. Consider conditioning the emit on successful permit application, e.g. "If the permit was successfully applied, MUST emit `PullApproval` followed by `TokensPulled`; otherwise MUST emit only `TokensPulled`", and rewording the "revert only" bullet.

Author: I removed the line `- MUST only be callable by the spender (`msg.sender == spender` in the permit).` since the spender is already deducted from the `msg.sender`, not accepted as a parameter. 

Removed the `- MUST revert only if the pull fails.` that was superfluous anyway. Actually, the reference implementation, when the permit fails, checks the allowance and reverts with a specific message, something that should be allowed.

The `maxPullable` function provides a standardized way to query available pull capacity (similar to `balanceOf` for direct holdings or `maxWithdraw` in [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md)), independent of spender allowances. The `upTo` parameter allows efficient checks in cascaded sourcing implementations without forcing full strategy evaluation every time.

Finally, the design is intentionally compatible with both EOAs and smart accounts, while leaning into the current direction of account abstraction ([ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) and others). A particularly powerful pattern is for a smart account to implement the `IPuller` interface directly on itself. In that case `owner == address(this)`, the account already controls its own funds (and any pre-approved external positions), and there is no need to grant approvals or trust an external Puller contract. This reduces deployment overhead, eliminates an extra approval step, and allows the pull logic to participate in batched user operations — a natural fit for modular wallets that already expose custom execution and spending-limit interfaces.

## Reference Implementation

> A reference implementation is provided, with a commented interface and an _educational example_ implementation of a Puller that pulls funds deinvesting from a vault.

Reviewer: "deinvesting" reads a bit awkwardly:
```suggestion
A reference implementation is provided, with a commented interface and an _educational example_ implementation of a Puller that pulls funds by withdrawing them from a vault.
```

- Allowance transfer enables refill patterns (guardian refilling sub-allowances), but a compromised spender can redirect its allowance to arbitrary addresses. The same trade-offs between infinite and finite allowances that apply to ERC-20 also apply here: infinite approvals improve user experience but increase damage potential if the spender is compromised.

- Custom sourcing logic can depend on external protocols that are subject to oracle manipulation, failed withdrawals, slippage, or protocol-specific exploits. Implementations should apply appropriate output guards where the logic allows it.

- Permit signatures depend on correct validation of EIP-712 digests, nonces, deadlines, and ERC-6492 rules (EOA recovery, ERC-1271 contracts, pre-deploy detection). Errors in any of these steps can lead to unauthorized approvals.

- Fee-on-transfer and rebasing tokens may behave unexpectedly during sourcing and transfer. Implementations should test with such tokens and consider before/after balance checks when necessary.

> - When the Puller interface is implemented directly on a smart account (owner == address(this)), any bug in the Puller code affects the entire account. Modular designs that isolate the logic are preferable.

Reviewer: Small follow-up from the earlier thread — the backticks around `owner == address(this)` didn't make it in here (the Rationale section does have them):
```suggestion
- When the Puller interface is implemented directly on a smart account (`owner == address(this)`), any bug in the Puller code affects the entire account. Modular designs that isolate the logic are preferable.
```
